[SPARK-57359][DOCS] Document the MERGE INTO statement in the SQL reference (#56420)
apache/spark: docs/sql-ref-syntax-dml-merge-into.md

---
layout: global
title: MERGE INTO
displayTitle: MERGE INTO
license: |
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 
     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 
  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
---

### Description

The `MERGE INTO` statement merges a source table or query into a target table. Rows of the
target table are matched against the source using a merge condition, and each row is then

> updated, deleted, or inserted according to the clauses that apply to it. All of these row-level

Reviewer: "inserted" doesn't quite apply to target rows — insertion creates new rows from unmatched source rows.
```suggestion
target table are matched against the source using a merge condition. Target rows are then
updated or deleted, and new rows are inserted from the source, according to the clauses that
apply. All of these row-level
```

Author: Done, reworded as suggested.

    [ WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE [ AND not_matched_by_source_condition ] THEN not_matched_by_source_action ] [ ... ]

matched_action
    { DELETE | UPDATE SET * | UPDATE SET { column = value } [ , ... ] }

not_matched_action
    { INSERT * | INSERT ( column [ , ... ] ) VALUES ( value [ , ... ] ) }

not_matched_by_source_action
    { DELETE | UPDATE SET { column = value } [ , ... ] }
```

### Parameters

* **target_table**

    Specifies the table to be merged into, which may be optionally qualified with a database name.
    An optional alias may be provided with or without the `AS` keyword.

    **Syntax:** `[ database_name. ] table_name [ [ AS ] alias ]`

* **source_table** / **source_query**

    The source of the merge, specified either as a table or as a parenthesized query. An optional
    alias may be provided with or without the `AS` keyword.

* **merge_condition**

    A boolean expression, introduced by the `ON` keyword, that determines how rows from the source
    match rows in the target. It controls which `WHEN` clauses apply to each row.

* **WHEN MATCHED [ AND matched_condition ] THEN matched_action**

>     Applies to rows that exist in both the source and the target (according to `merge_condition`).

Reviewer: Worth documenting which table's columns each clause may reference: `WHEN MATCHED` conditions and update values can reference both target and source; `WHEN NOT MATCHED` conditions and insert values can reference only the source table; `WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE` conditions and update values can reference only the target table (`Analyzer.scala:1727-1803`). This is a common surprise — e.g. `WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE THEN UPDATE SET salary = s.salary` fails to resolve — and the examples follow the rule without stating it. One sentence in each of the three clause entries would cover it.

Author: Done. Added a sentence to each of the three clause entries documenting which table's columns the condition and action may reference (WHEN MATCHED: both; WHEN NOT MATCHED: source only; WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE: target only).

    restricts which unmatched source rows the clause applies to. The `not_matched_action` can be one of:
    - `INSERT *`: inserts a new target row using all source columns, matched by name.
    - `INSERT ( column [ , ... ] ) VALUES ( value [ , ... ] )`: inserts a new target row, assigning
      the given values to the listed columns.

* **WHEN NOT MATCHED BY SOURCE [ AND not_matched_by_source_condition ] THEN not_matched_by_source_action**

    Applies to target rows that have no matching row in the source. The optional
    `not_matched_by_source_condition` further restricts which such target rows the clause applies to.
    The `not_matched_by_source_action` can be one of:
    - `DELETE`: deletes the unmatched target row.
    - `UPDATE SET column = value [ , ... ]`: updates the listed target columns with the given values.

**Note:**
- A `MERGE INTO` statement must contain at least one `WHEN` clause.
- Multiple clauses of the same type may be specified. For a given row, the clauses of the relevant
  type are evaluated in the order they are written, and the first clause whose condition is satisfied

>   is applied.

Reviewer: The parser also requires that all but the last clause of each type have an `AND` condition (`nonLastMatchedClauseOmitConditionError` and variants, `AstBuilder.scala:1336-1346`) — this bullet is the natural place to say so.
```suggestion
- Multiple clauses of the same type may be specified. For a given row, the clauses of the relevant
  type are evaluated in the order they are written, and the first clause whose condition is satisfied
  is applied. When multiple clauses of the same type are specified, only the last one may omit its
  `AND` condition.
```

Author: Done, added the note about only the last clause of each type being able to omit its `AND` condition.
